Hi everyone, I'm Freda, and I'm an epidemiologist turned data scientist.
And this means that I've kind of pivoted from conducting research with neurological data
to analyzing health research funding data at the Canadian Institutes of Health Research.
This also means that throughout my career, I've kind of consistently been presenting various types of data findings
to various types of non-data audiences.
And these audiences have ranged from basic scientists to clinicians or students or patients,
and now government executives and policy makers.
And I've learned a lot, and I don't think I need to convince anyone here of how important it is
for us to be able to effectively present about our data.
Without this skill, our data and our findings stop with us and can't move forward to have any further impact.
So today I want to talk a little bit about how we can improve our data presentations beyond just avoiding pie charts.
And how many of you have ever gone to a presentation, and you walked away and you were like,
wow, that was such a great topic, but I had such a hard time listening and focusing,
and I don't really remember anything.
Hopefully that hasn't happened this week.
But no matter what, I might argue that you're not the problem,
because I'm constantly re-inspired by this topic.
Just earlier this year at work, I was assigned to help a team with some of their analytics,
which is pretty common.
So we worked together, we did a lot of analyses,
and when it came time to present the results to their stakeholders,
they asked me if I wanted to join the meeting,
just to see and also maybe be there in case there are any data-specific questions.
And in their meeting, they talked about aims and goals and questions they wanted to answer.
They presented a bunch of results.
And the speakers were good, and the slides were very nice.
But even though I was the one who had actually conducted all of the analyses,
I still managed to walk away from that meeting and not really remember anything
and not know what their main message was.
They had all the pieces that were there,
but they hadn't been connected or presented in a way that made them stick with me.
It was kind of like we were walking through this forest of random facts and findings,
but there was no signpost or leader to get us to this destination,
or in this case, our main message.
And just like you would never start leading a group on a hike
without first knowing where you were going, your destination,
you should never start working on your data presentations
without first identifying what your main message is.
Because once you have this message, you can identify what you need
in order to lead your audience towards it
in a way that gets them to listen and understand and remember what you're saying.
And this is not always easy when you're presenting a lot of numbers
to non-data audiences.
Your presentation probably has a bunch of different types of data and analyses,
maybe some shiny apps.
But if you're not able to identify what your main message is,
your audience definitely won't be able to either.
And we're often so excited to show a lot of stuff.
But we know that our audiences are never going to remember
everything we show them.
And so kind of prioritizing this one thing we can get to stick,
that's our goal here.
And a lot of speakers this week have done something similar.
They'll be talking and they'll say,
if you're only going to take away one thing from this presentation,
and they'll just go out and say it.
And that's really the idea here.
And unlike this other story where it was about another group,
I've also, of course, been guilty of kind of poor communication
in my presentations.
One particularly vivid memory for me was very early in my career
it was my thesis proposal.
So it was a very important day.
And I was presenting to a very smart and important group.
And I just got mixed up as to what the goal of my presentation was.
Instead of identifying a message and kind of telling a story,
I just wanted to show them everything I'd done.
I wanted to show them all my data and all my analyses
and that I'd left no stone unturned.
And ultimately I wanted to impress them.
And I wanted them to think I was smart.
And I thought maybe if I provided so much information,
they'd be less likely to ask a lot of questions at the end
because questions are scary.
And as you can imagine, my presentation was just like
this busy, incoherent mess.
And I was trying to include so much information
that I talked way too fast.
And this all came together and resulted in a ton of questions
because I couldn't identify my message.
They couldn't identify my message.
They didn't know what my proposal was about.
I wasn't leading anyone anywhere.
I was just kind of presenting defensively instead.
Because once we identify what our main message is,
we can then identify what information we need
to lead our audiences towards it
and avoid getting lost kind of in this forest.
And unlike that thesis example that I was just saying,
you don't want to try and cram in all your data
and all your analyses into your presentation just in case.
Because this usually results in our message getting lost.
And it's not that you're hiding anything from your audience,
or I hope you're not,
but in focusing on what's relevant,
you're getting your message across,
and they're always welcome to ask about that extra stuff later.
Just like your presentation is kind of one big message,
you should be focusing on kind of one piece of evidence
and one smaller message at a time
to keep your presentation clear and concise.
Because sometimes less is more.
One of the ways I was able to kind of wean myself off this need
to overfill and overcomplicate my presentation
was to have supplementary slides,
sometimes a lot of supplementary slides.
Because often my need to overfill came from
either being so excited to show everything,
you know, what if they were interested in it,
or God forbid, what if it came up in the questions
and I wasn't prepared.
So having all the supplementary slides
really helped me to focus on my story,
knowing that they were there in case I needed them.
Kind of like, you know, your first aid kit in your backpack
when you're hiking.
Good to know it's there, hopefully you won't need it.
Usually you don't.
And once you have your main message,
and you know the evidence you need to support it,
you can start incorporating visuals into your presentation.
And visuals are our tools.
Sometimes they're figures, sometimes they're images,
sometimes they're just text.
And I'm not going to sit here and be like, you know,
this data should be with this kind of figure,
you should use this plot for this kind of data,
because our work and our preferences can dictate that.
I mean, I was requested to make a pie chart this year.
It's fine.
What I more want to focus on is that our visuals
are there to support us.
And one of the ways our visuals can help support us
is by making sure kind of each of these smaller pieces
of evidence and these smaller messages that we're using,
we're focusing and emphasizing on one at a time.
And one recommendation I had, again,
early on in my career was this five by five rule.
Some of you might have heard of it,
some of you might have not.
But basically it just means no more than five bullet points
per slide, no more than five words per bullet point.
And I don't like hard rules.
There are exceptions to everything, including this.
But I do think that this kind of rule helps to remind us
about two important things with regards to our visuals.
And that is, like I mentioned,
our visuals are there to support us.
Our visuals are not there to do the heavy lifting.
And you should never be able to send your slide deck
to someone and have them understand what it's about
without your accompanying presentation.
The second thing is that our visuals should be kept
as simple as possible.
And I don't mean the figures themselves,
because sometimes you're not going to be able
to have a simple figure.
You need a complicated one.
But if you find yourself trying to include a lot of figures
on one slide or trying to cram in more and more text,
you should probably be breaking this slide up
into multiple slides.
One, because you're probably not focusing and emphasizing
on one message at a time.
And two, because this just helps our audiences
with short attention spans pay attention.
Just like our presentation is kind of
one overarching message,
each slide should have one concluding thought.
This.
I remember a visiting scholar one time
coming to do a presentation at my old work.
And he was supposed to give a 20-minute presentation.
And he went up to the front, and he plugged in his laptop.
And some people noticed that he had something like
180 slides, and they just panicked.
But his presentation, his visuals were supportive,
and they were simple.
It's just he had a lot of kind of repetitions
where he emphasized different areas or highlighted results,
and he had a ton of supplementary slides.
And his presentation was really good.
Because we shouldn't be afraid of too many slides.
We should be afraid of really busy slides.
And I think we can all know when we've,
our visuals have become kind of a hindrance
instead of helpful.
Because you pull up your slide, and you start talking,
and at some point you look at your audience,
and they're peering at your slide,
and they're kind of reading it,
and they're trying to understand it,
and they've completely stopped listening
to anything you're saying,
which might be happening right now.
Because you've become secondary to your visual.
And even though figures are often preferred
over kind of big tables or big blocks of text
to keep your audience's attention,
what's more important than the type of visual you use
is that you're walking your audience through
what it is and what it means.
This visual, for example, is fine.
This is on our website.
You can find it, and it also has the accompanying data
that was used to make it.
And the data table has funding type rows
and fiscal year columns,
and it's just a bunch of numbers.
And the figure is a much clearer way
to show these patterns over time.
But the second I bring it up,
I should still be kind of leading audiences
through my presentation.
I say, you know, here we have figure three, CIHR.
Again, that's my work,
Canadian Institutes of Health Research.
CIHR fiscal year investments by funding type.
And then I kind of dive right in.
I say, you know, on the y-axis here
we have investments in millions of dollars,
and on the x-axis we have fiscal years.
And then you go into the data,
and you tell them what the message
you want them to take away is.
It can be as simple as, as you can see here,
investigator-initiated research
and research in priority areas
have been consistently increasing since 2000.
This helps the audience
to stay on track with your narrative
instead of just kind of throwing them a compass
and trusting that they can find their way.
It's even better if you can really emphasize
the area that you want them to pay attention to.
If I said something like, you know,
there was a sharp peak,
or a sharp rise in research
in priority area investments in 2020, 2021.
Can anyone guess what the priority area
of health research was at this time?
If you can replace kind of like a big, busy table
with a simple sentence or a figure, that's ideal.
But again, what's more important
is that you're leading your audience
to your narrative is.
And lots of times I've been presenting
to audiences that I thought were very smart,
I assumed much smarter than I was,
and it made me really shrink away from leading.
I thought I shouldn't over-explain things
that I might look kind of silly
if I was talking down to the audience.
But you know your data,
you've done the analyses,
and this is your presentation
that you're supposed to be leading.
Even though it can be really tempting
to assume that any figure you present
is so obvious, that the message is so obvious,
they haven't been looking at it
for as long as you have.
And no matter what,
you should be walking them through it
the way I did, kind of axes to data to message.
Similarly, if there's a figure
you're not gonna walk through,
don't just throw it on your slide just in case.
That's when our audiences start doing the peering
and wandering away from us,
and that's when our message gets lost.
You are there to lead,
and your visuals are there to support you.
And finally, you've done your visuals,
you can start working on your oral presentation.
And your oral presentation job is
that final step to really get your audience
to listen to and understand your message,
and hopefully to get that message remembered.
And if there's only one thing you can recommend,
or I can recommend,
about the oral aspect of your presentation,
it's to say it out loud at least once,
ideally many, many times.
We already spoke about articulation.
They really force you to say it out loud
before you come here.
And as you're making your slides,
you're probably already kind of starting crafting
what you're gonna say in your head.
Maybe you're making some slide notes.
And I know that when I start making slide notes,
I just tend to write in this weirdly formal way.
It's how I write, it's how I email.
I don't know if it's me or if it was academia.
But the second I start saying it out loud,
I'm able to identify what doesn't actually sound natural
or feel natural for me,
and the areas that I trip over.
And also if I have an area without kind of a main message,
I kind of trail off without a concluding thought
and it helps me to highlight those.
They say you shouldn't write a script for your presentation,
and I agree,
but the more times you're able to practice
saying it out loud,
the more natural it'll become,
both in the way you present it,
but also if there's little hiccups
like technical difficulties or a phone call,
or a random question that comes up.
Practicing it out loud is so important.
Another important aspect of your oral presentation,
in addition to kind of getting your message across,
is to really create an environment
that encourages audience to interact with what you're saying.
And again, I touched on how questions are terrifying,
and I'm often really nervous about them
in my data presentations.
But an old supervisor of mine used to say
that questions are a compliment,
and this is because you want your audience
to both have understood,
but also care enough about what you're saying
to bother asking a question about it.
And even if they ask those really hard questions,
that can help maybe identify areas
that we've missed before it's too late,
or even kind of indicate
where we should be heading to next.
Questions are a good thing.
And in order for an audience to ask questions,
you of course,
the most important thing
is that they understood what you're saying.
But equally,
providing this kind of encouraging environment
where they're comfortable interacting with you
is just as important.
And that's kind of done in ways
that we've already touched on,
walking through your findings,
language like,
see here,
what this is showing,
how to get your message across,
versus, you know,
obviously this,
assuming they can interpret everything,
flipping through slides,
that can make your audience
a little too lost,
or even just too intimidated
to ask any questions at the end.
And this is related to the age-old recommendation
of knowing your audience.
While you might be comfortable
just providing a bunch of statistical outputs
to a group of data analysts,
or scientists,
or whatnot,
you probably want to provide more context
and more explanation
to a more diverse group
of students or stakeholders.
Even a posit,
this is my first time here,
I assumed they'd be,
you know,
pretty,
we'd all be on the same page,
but once you start talking to people,
you realize how much diversity there is,
even within an audience like this.
So although you should be able
to tailor your presentation
to the audience at hand,
generally keeping things clearer,
a little bit simpler,
just expanding more in your explanations,
pausing for your messages,
that'll really help get your message across,
and encourage your audience
to interact with your findings,
which is what we want to invite.
Another tiny note
about inviting audience interaction,
I'm sure everyone's familiar with this,
say you went to a presentation
and it's got a lot of results,
a lot of different findings,
and someone asks a question,
they're like,
oh, can you go back
to when you were talking about this,
and they're like,
no, no, no,
like, further, further, further,
no, it was before,
you know, the slide,
the blue dots and the red lines,
it can be any presentation,
but especially when you have
really content-heavy presentations,
just number your slides.
It can help save time
and just, you know,
one little extra step
in inviting that audience interaction
we're looking for.
And now you've done it.
You've translated your findings.
You identified your main message,
you used data
to create a clear path
towards that message,
you incorporated
your supporting visuals,
and you delivered
an oral presentation
that led your audience
step by step
through the journey
that you wanted them to take.
In keeping your message clear
and understandable,
you've allowed your findings
to move beyond you
and have impacts like,
you know,
inspiring further research
or informing policy
or improving business operations.
We need to be able
to translate our findings
to a variety of audiences
because in doing this,
our findings and our data
doesn't just stop with us.
It can have further impact.
And in order to do this,
we need to learn
to lead our audience
towards the message
and not leave them
lost in the data.
Thank you, Farida.
And as a reminder,
you can submit questions
via Slido.
We have a few here.
Do you suggest
different slide decks
for presenting
versus sharing out?
So if we're presenting
more slides
that tell a story
but condensing
into fewer slides
for sharing out?
Sharing out.
Oh, right,
like if you are sending it
to someone
and not presenting it?
No, I still don't think
fewer slides is the answer.
I still think
when you're sharing
something externally,
you will need to write more.
You're not going to do
the five-by-five rule,
but I think the main goal
is to still focus
on that one message
at a time,
and that doesn't mean
you need to condense things.
That's the best way
to get your story across,
one small message at a time
in order to tell that story.
I don't think condensing
really serves us
even when we're sharing out,
except for people
being a little intimidated,
but that's okay.
How do you suggest
organizing the supplementary slides
to provide all the extras
without the live presentation?
That's a great question,
and I think this is really
a preference thing.
What I would recommend
that I do
is when I have
my supplementary slides,
I have these big title blocks
separating them to sections,
so when someone asks
about fiscal outcomes,
say, okay,
and I can find
the title slide
and then look within that section.
I tend to organize them
in what I think
is most likely to come up,
but I think the way
you organize them
beyond that is up to you.
Someone asked,
I love this concept.
What's your advice
for organizations
where the data's
secondary message
and supports an idea
to the decision pipeline,
where they tend to have
more words on slides
rather than figures and tables?
Sorry.
Can you say again?
What's your advice
on organizations
where the data's
the secondary message
and supports an idea
to decision pipeline,
so more words on slides
rather than having figures and tables?
If the data's secondary
to the message,
then it's just
one of your chapters, right?
It's just your whole presentation
is not about the data,
but rather in each
of your main messages,
your data's only going
to be kind of one
of the little slides
or one of the little chapters
in that story,
and that's okay, too.
How can we utilize LLMs
to improve
our own conversation tactics
tied to specific audiences?
You know, this is probably
not a great question
for me at the moment.
One thing that often makes,
if we're trying to explain
something complicated,
and you've probably noticed this
in a lot of the talks
that have been going on today,
if you can kind of incorporate
a metaphor into your story,
that really helps people
to listen and kind of connect
with it and remember it,
so LLMs can be great
maybe for asking
or getting a story across,
but again,
not really my strength,
I'm afraid.
What do you think
about slides as documents,
slide decks
that contain details
that could be consumed later?
Oh, right, like again,
sending, yeah.
Instead of a lot
of presentations.
I mean, again,
you are going to need
to include more information.
I really want to emphasize,
I don't think you should
be condensing
into fewer slides.
I think there's going
to be a lot of slides,
and there's going
to be more text,
but still doable,
which is not my favorite.
I think we have time
for probably two more.
Sure.
You have beautiful visuals
that really added
to your presentation.
What practical tips
or tools do you recommend?
Thank you.
I was really nervous
about the visuals
because with our articulation coach,
I didn't have them ready
when I was supposed to.
I mean,
I don't want to sound
like a broken record,
but these,
I really worry
that these were too simple,
that they were too kind
of bare bones,
and it did make
my presentation harder
to remember,
but I've received a lot
of great feedback about them,
and I'm just really hammering home
that the simpler you can make them,
the more the audience
is going to remember them.
I do, you know,
little things
that I didn't bring up,
these particular slides
take into account color blindness.
That's a nice thing
to do as well,
but supportive and simple
is really the message there.
Thank you as well.
Great, and last question.
Do you make any supplementary docs
for your presentations
since you're not designing
the slides to be self-explanatory?
How do you handle requests
for slides?
Absolutely.
If I'm sending my slides
to someone,
I would definitely send
supplementary information
if it's something
really content-heavy.
You know,
things that you refer to
in your presentation,
you can then make notes,
see supplementary table,
that's a really good tactic
for doing this sort of thing.
I agree with that, yes.
Great.
Thank you, Farida.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.